1. Overview

ActivityPub provides two layers:

    A server to server federation protocol (so decentralized websites can share information)
    A client to server protocol (so users, including real-world users, bots, and other automated processes, can communicate with ActivityPub using their accounts on servers, from a phone or desktop or web application or whatever)

ActivityPub implementations can implement just one of these things or both of them. However, once you've implemented one, it isn't too many steps to implement the other, and there are a lot of benefits to both (making your website part of the decentralized social web, and being able to use clients and client libraries that work across a wide variety of social websites).

In ActivityPub, a user is represented by "actors" via the user's accounts on servers. User's accounts on different servers correspond to different actors. Every Actor has:

    An inbox: How they get messages from the world
    An outbox: How they send messages to others

Actor with inbox and outbox

These are endpoints, or really, just URLs which are listed in the ActivityPub actor's ActivityStreams description. (More on ActivityStreams later).

Here's an example of the record of our friend Alyssa P. Hacker:
Example 1

{"@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
 "type": "Person",
 "id": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
 "name": "Alyssa P. Hacker",
 "preferredUsername": "alyssa",
 "summary": "Lisp enthusiast hailing from MIT",
 "inbox": "https://social.example/alyssa/inbox/",
 "outbox": "https://social.example/alyssa/outbox/",
 "followers": "https://social.example/alyssa/followers/",
 "following": "https://social.example/alyssa/following/",
 "liked": "https://social.example/alyssa/liked/"}

ActivityPub uses [ActivityStreams] for its vocabulary. This is pretty great because ActivityStreams includes all the common terms you need to represent all the activities and content flowing around a social network. It's likely that ActivityStreams already includes all the vocabulary you need, but even if it doesn't, ActivityStreams can be extended via [JSON-LD]. If you know what JSON-LD is, you can take advantage of the cool linked data approaches provided by JSON-LD. If you don't, don't worry, JSON-LD documents and ActivityStreams can be understood as plain old simple JSON. (If you're going to add extensions, that's the point at which JSON-LD really helps you out).

So, okay. Alyssa wants to talk to her friends, and her friends want to talk to her! Luckily these "inbox" and "outbox" things can help us out. They both behave differently for GET and POST. Let's see how that works:

Actor with messages flowing from rest of world to inbox and from outbox to rest of world

Hey nice, so just as a recap:

    You can POST to someone's inbox to send them a message (server-to-server / federation only... this is federation!)
    You can GET from your inbox to read your latest messages (client-to-server; this is like reading your social network stream)
    You can POST to your outbox to send messages to the world (client-to-server)
    You can GET from someone's outbox to see what messages they've posted (or at least the ones you're authorized to see). (client-to-server and/or server-to-server)

Of course, if that last one (GET'ing from someone's outbox) was the only way to see what people have sent, this wouldn't be a very efficient federation protocol! Indeed, federation happens usually by servers posting messages sent by actors to actors on other servers' inboxes.

Let's see an example! Let's say Alyssa wants to catch up with her friend, Ben Bitdiddle. She lent him a book recently and she wants to make sure he returns it to her. Here's the message she composes, as an ActivityStreams object:
Example 2

{"@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
 "type": "Note",
 "to": ["https://chatty.example/ben/"],
 "attributedTo": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
 "content": "Say, did you finish reading that book I lent you?"}

This is a note addressed to Ben. She POSTs it to her outbox.

Actor posting message to outbox

Since this is a non-activity object, the server recognizes that this is an object being newly created, and does the courtesy of wrapping it in a Create activity. (Activities sent around in ActivityPub generally follow the pattern of some activity by some actor being taken on some object. In this case the activity is a Create of a Note object, posted by a Person).
Example 3

{"@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
 "type": "Create",
 "id": "https://social.example/alyssa/posts/a29a6843-9feb-4c74-a7f7-081b9c9201d3",
 "to": ["https://chatty.example/ben/"],
 "actor": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
 "object": {"type": "Note",
            "id": "https://social.example/alyssa/posts/49e2d03d-b53a-4c4c-a95c-94a6abf45a19",
            "attributedTo": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
            "to": ["https://chatty.example/ben/"],
            "content": "Say, did you finish reading that book I lent you?"}}

Alyssa's server looks up Ben's ActivityStreams actor object, finds his inbox endpoint, and POSTs her object to his inbox.

Server posting to remote actor's inbox

Technically these are two separate steps... one is client to server communication, and one is server to server communication (federation). But, since we're using them both in this example, we can abstractly think of this as being a streamlined submission from outbox to inbox:

Note flowing from one actor's outbox to other actor's inbox

Cool! A while later, Alyssa checks what new messages she's gotten. Her phone polls her inbox via GET, and amongst a bunch of cat videos posted by friends and photos of her nephew posted by her sister, she sees the following:
Example 4

{"@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
 "type": "Create",
 "id": "https://chatty.example/ben/p/51086",
 "to": ["https://social.example/alyssa/"],
 "actor": "https://chatty.example/ben/",
 "object": {"type": "Note",
            "id": "https://chatty.example/ben/p/51085",
            "attributedTo": "https://chatty.example/ben/",
            "to": ["https://social.example/alyssa/"],
            "inReplyTo": "https://social.example/alyssa/posts/49e2d03d-b53a-4c4c-a95c-94a6abf45a19",
            "content": "<p>Argh, yeah, sorry, I'll get it back to you tomorrow.</p>
                        <p>I was reviewing the section on register machines,
                           since it's been a while since I wrote one.</p>"}}

Alyssa is relieved, and likes Ben's post:
Example 5

{"@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
 "type": "Like",
 "id": "https://social.example/alyssa/posts/5312e10e-5110-42e5-a09b-934882b3ecec",
 "to": ["https://chatty.example/ben/"],
 "actor": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
 "object": "https://chatty.example/ben/p/51086"}

She POSTs this message to her outbox. (Since it's an activity, her server knows it doesn't need to wrap it in a Create object).

Feeling happy about things, she decides to post a public message to her followers. Soon the following message is blasted to all the members of her followers collection, and since it has the special Public group addressed, is generally readable by anyone.
Example 6

{"@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
 "type": "Create",
 "id": "https://social.example/alyssa/posts/9282e9cc-14d0-42b3-a758-d6aeca6c876b",
 "to": ["https://social.example/alyssa/followers/",
        "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public"],
 "actor": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
 "object": {"type": "Note",
            "id": "https://social.example/alyssa/posts/d18c55d4-8a63-4181-9745-4e6cf7938fa1",
            "attributedTo": "https://social.example/alyssa/",
            "to": ["https://social.example/alyssa/followers/",
                   "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public"],
            "content": "Lending books to friends is nice.  Getting them back is even nicer! :)"}}

1.1 Social Web Working Group

ActivityPub is one of several related specifications being produced by the Social Web Working Group. Implementers interested in alternative approaches and complementary protocols should review [Micropub] and the overview document [Social-Web-Protocols].
2. Conformance

As well as sections marked as non-normative, all authoring guidelines, diagrams, examples, and notes in this specification are non-normative. Everything else in this specification is normative.

The key words MAY, MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD, and SHOULD NOT are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
2.1 Specification Profiles

This specification defines two closely related and interacting protocols:

A client to server protocol, or "Social API"
    This protocol permits a client to act on behalf of a user. For example, this protocol is used by a mobile phone application to interact with a social stream of the user's actor. 
A server to server protocol, or "Federation Protocol"
    This protocol is used to distribute activities between actors on different servers, tying them into the same social graph. 

The ActivityPub specification is designed so that once either of these protocols are implemented, supporting the other is of very little additional effort. However, servers may still implement one without the other. This gives three conformance classes:

ActivityPub conformant Client
    This designation applies to any implementation of the entirety of the client portion of the client to server protocol. 
ActivityPub conformant Server
    This designation applies to any implementation of the entirety of the server portion of the client to server protocol. 
ActivityPub conformant Federated Server
    This designation applies to any implementation of the entirety of the federation protocols. 

It is called out whenever a portion of the specification only applies to implementation of the federation protocol. In addition, whenever requirements are specified, it is called out whether they apply to the client or server (for the client-to-server protocol) or whether referring to a sending or receiving server in the server-to-server protocol.
3. Objects

Objects are the core concept around which both [ActivityStreams] and ActivityPub are built. Objects are often wrapped in Activities and are contained in streams of Collections, which are themselves subclasses of Objects. See the [Activity-Vocabulary] document, particularly the Core Classes; ActivityPub follows the mapping of this vocabulary very closely.

ActivityPub defines some terms in addition to those provided by ActivityStreams. These terms are provided in the ActivityPub JSON-LD context at https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams. Implementers SHOULD include the ActivityPub context in their object definitions. Implementers MAY include additional context as appropriate.

ActivityPub shares the same URI / IRI conventions as in ActivityStreams.

Servers SHOULD validate the content they receive to avoid content spoofing attacks. (A server should do something at least as robust as checking that the object appears as received at its origin, but mechanisms such as checking signatures would be better if available). No particular mechanism for verification is authoritatively specified by this document, but please see Security Considerations for some suggestions and good practices.
As an example, if example.com receives the activity
Example 7

{
  "@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
  "type": "Like",
  "actor": "https://example.net/~mallory",
  "to": ["https://hatchat.example/sarah/",
         "https://example.com/peeps/john/"],
  "object": {
    "@context": {"@language": "en"},
    "id": "https://example.org/~alice/note/23",
    "type": "Note",
    "attributedTo": "https://example.org/~alice",
    "content": "I'm a goat"
  }
}

it should dereference the id both to ensure that it exists and is a valid object, and that it is not misrepresenting the object. (In this example, Mallory could be spoofing an object allegedly posted by Alice).
3.1 Object Identifiers

All Objects in [ActivityStreams] should have unique global identifiers. ActivityPub extends this requirement; all objects distributed by the ActivityPub protocol MUST have unique global identifiers, unless they are intentionally transient (short lived activities that are not intended to be able to be looked up, such as some kinds of chat messages or game notifications). These identifiers must fall into one of the following groups:

    Publicly dereferencable URIs, such as HTTPS URIs, with their authority belonging to that of their originating server. (Publicly facing content SHOULD use HTTPS URIs).
    An ID explicitly specified as the JSON null object, which implies an anonymous object (a part of its parent context)

Identifiers MUST be provided for activities posted in server to server communication, unless the activity is intentionally transient. However, for client to server communication, a server receiving an object posted to the outbox with no specified id SHOULD allocate an object ID in the actor's namespace and attach it to the posted object.

All objects have the following properties:

id
    The object's unique global identifier (unless the object is transient, in which case the id MAY be omitted). 
type
    The type of the object. 

3.2 Retrieving objects

The HTTP GET method may be dereferenced against an object's id property to retrieve the activity. Servers MAY use HTTP content negotiation as defined in [RFC7231] to select the type of data to return in response to a request, but MUST present the ActivityStreams object representation in response to application/ld+json; profile="https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams", and SHOULD also present the ActivityStreams representation in response to application/activity+json as well. The client MUST specify an Accept header with the application/ld+json; profile="https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams" media type in order to retrieve the activity.

Servers MAY implement other behavior for requests which do not comply with the above requirement. (For example, servers may implement additional legacy protocols, or may use the same URI for both HTML and ActivityStreams representations of a resource).

Servers MAY require authorization as specified in B.1 Authentication and Authorization, and may additionally implement their own authorization rules. Servers SHOULD fail requests which do not pass their authorization checks with the appropriate HTTP error code, or the 403 Forbidden error code where the existence of the object is considered private. An origin server which does not wish to disclose the existence of a private target MAY instead respond with a status code of 404 Not Found.
3.3 The source property

In addition to all the properties defined by the [Activity-Vocabulary], ActivityPub extends the Object by supplying the source property. The source property is intended to convey some sort of source from which the content markup was derived, as a form of provenance, or to support future editing by clients. In general, clients do the conversion from source to content, not the other way around.

The value of source is itself an object which uses its own content and mediaType fields to supply source information.
Example 8

{
  "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
               {"@language": "en"}],
  "type": "Note",
  "id": "http://postparty.example/p/2415",
  "content": "<p>I <em>really</em> like strawberries!</p>",
  "source": {
    "content": "I *really* like strawberries!",
    "mediaType": "text/markdown"}
}

Note: What to do when clients can't meaningfully handle a mediaType?

In general, it's best to let a user edit their original post in the same source format they originally composed it in. But not all clients can reliably provide a nice interface for all source types, and since clients are expected to do the conversion from source to content, some clients may work with a media type that another client does not know how to work with. While a client could feasibly provide the content markup to be edited and ignore the source, this means that the user will lose the more desirable form of the original source in any future revisions. A client doing so should thus provide a minimally obtrusive warning cautioning that the original source format is not understood and is thus being ignored.

For example, Alyssa P. Hacker likes to post to her ActivityPub powered blog via an Emacs client she has written, leveraging Org mode. Later she switches to editing on her phone's client, which has no idea what text/x-org is or how to render it to HTML, so it provides a text box to edit the original content instead. A helpful warning displays above the edit area saying, "This was originally written in another markup language we don't know how to handle. If you edit, you'll lose your original source!" Alyssa decides the small typo fix isn't worth losing her nice org-mode markup and decides to make the update when she gets home.
4. Actors

ActivityPub actors are generally one of the ActivityStreams Actor Types, but they don't have to be. For example, a Profile object might be used as an actor, or a type from an ActivityStreams extension. Actors are retrieved like any other Object in ActivityPub. Like other ActivityStreams objects, actors have an id, which is a URI. When entered directly into a user interface (for example on a login form), it is desirable to support simplified naming. For this purpose, ID normalization SHOULD be performed as follows:

    If the entered ID is a valid URI, then it is to be used directly.
    If it appears that the user neglected to add a scheme for a URI that would otherwise be considered valid, such as example.org/alice/, clients MAY attempt to provide a default scheme, preferably https.
    Otherwise, the entered value should be considered invalid.

Once the actor's URI has been identified, it should be dereferenced.
Note
ActivityPub does not dictate a specific relationship between "users" and Actors; many configurations are possible. There may be multiple human users or organizations controlling an Actor, or likewise one human or organization may control multiple Actors. Similarly, an Actor may represent a piece of software, like a bot, or an automated process. More detailed "user" modelling, for example linking together of Actors which are controlled by the same entity, or allowing one Actor to be presented through multiple alternate profiles or aspects, are at the discretion of the implementation.
4.1 Actor objects

Actor objects MUST have, in addition to the properties mandated by 3.1 Object Identifiers, the following properties:

inbox
    A reference to an [ActivityStreams] OrderedCollection comprised of all the messages received by the actor; see 5.2 Inbox. 
outbox
    An [ActivityStreams] OrderedCollection comprised of all the messages produced by the actor; see 5.1 Outbox. 

Implementations SHOULD, in addition, provide the following properties:

following
    A link to an [ActivityStreams] collection of the actors that this actor is following; see 5.4 Following Collection 
followers
    A link to an [ActivityStreams] collection of the actors that follow this actor; see 5.3 Followers Collection. 

Implementations MAY provide the following properties:

liked
    A link to an [ActivityStreams] collection of objects this actor has liked; see 5.5 Liked Collection. 

Example 9

{
  "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
               {"@language": "ja"}],
  "type": "Person",
  "id": "https://kenzoishii.example.com/",
  "following": "https://kenzoishii.example.com/following.json",
  "followers": "https://kenzoishii.example.com/followers.json",
  "liked": "https://kenzoishii.example.com/liked.json",
  "inbox": "https://kenzoishii.example.com/inbox.json",
  "outbox": "https://kenzoishii.example.com/feed.json",
  "preferredUsername": "kenzoishii",
  "name": "石井健蔵",
  "summary": "この方はただの例です",
  "icon": [
    "https://kenzoishii.example.com/image/165987aklre4"
  ]
}

Implementations MAY, in addition, provide the following properties:

streams
    A list of supplementary Collections which may be of interest. 
preferredUsername
    A short username which may be used to refer to the actor, with no uniqueness guarantees. 
endpoints
    A json object which maps additional (typically server/domain-wide) endpoints which may be useful either for this actor or someone referencing this actor. This mapping may be nested inside the actor document as the value or may be a link to a JSON-LD document with these properties. 

The endpoints mapping MAY include the following properties:

proxyUrl
    Endpoint URI so this actor's clients may access remote ActivityStreams objects which require authentication to access. To use this endpoint, the client posts an x-www-form-urlencoded id parameter with the value being the id of the requested ActivityStreams object. 
oauthAuthorizationEndpoint
    If OAuth 2.0 bearer tokens [RFC6749] [RFC6750] are being used for authenticating client to server interactions, this endpoint specifies a URI at which a browser-authenticated user may obtain a new authorization grant. 
oauthTokenEndpoint
    If OAuth 2.0 bearer tokens [RFC6749] [RFC6750] are being used for authenticating client to server interactions, this endpoint specifies a URI at which a client may acquire an access token. 
provideClientKey
    If Linked Data Signatures and HTTP Signatures are being used for authentication and authorization, this endpoint specifies a URI at which browser-authenticated users may authorize a client's public key for client to server interactions. 
signClientKey
    If Linked Data Signatures and HTTP Signatures are being used for authentication and authorization, this endpoint specifies a URI at which a client key may be signed by the actor's key for a time window to act on behalf of the actor in interacting with foreign servers. 
sharedInbox
    An optional endpoint used for wide delivery of publicly addressed activities and activities sent to followers. sharedInbox endpoints SHOULD also be publicly readable OrderedCollection objects containing objects addressed to the Public special collection. Reading from the sharedInbox endpoint MUST NOT present objects which are not addressed to the Public endpoint. 

Note

As the upstream vocabulary for ActivityPub, any applicable [ActivityStreams] property may be used on ActivityPub Actors. Some ActivityStreams properties are particularly worth highlighting to demonstrate how they are used in ActivityPub implementations.

url
    A link to the actor's "profile web page", if not equal to the value of id. 
name
    The preferred "nickname" or "display name" of the actor. 
summary
    A quick summary or bio by the user about themselves.
icon
    A link to an image or an Image object which represents the user's profile picture (this may be a thumbnail). 

Note

Properties containing natural language values, such as name, preferredUsername, or summary, make use of natural language support defined in ActivityStreams.
5. Collections

[ActivityStreams] defines the collection concept; ActivityPub defines several collections with special behavior. Note that ActivityPub makes use of ActivityStreams paging to traverse large sets of objects.

Note that some of these collections are specified to be of type OrderedCollection specifically, while others are permitted to be either a Collection or an OrderedCollection. An OrderedCollection MUST be presented consistently in reverse chronological order.
Note

What property is used to determine the reverse chronological order is intentionally left as an implementation detail. For example, many SQL-style databases use an incrementing integer as an identifier, which can be reasonably used for handling insertion order in most cases. In other databases, an insertion time timestamp may be preferred. What is used isn't important, but the ordering of elements must remain intact, with newer items first. A property which changes regularly, such a "last updated" timestamp, should not be used.
5.1 Outbox

The outbox is discovered through the outbox property of an actor's profile. The outbox MUST be an OrderedCollection.

The outbox stream contains activities the user has published, subject to the ability of the requestor to retrieve the activity (that is, the contents of the outbox are filtered by the permissions of the person reading it). If a user submits a request without Authorization the server should respond with all of the Public posts. This could potentially be all relevant objects published by the user, though the number of available items is left to the discretion of those implementing and deploying the server.

The outbox accepts HTTP POST requests, with behaviour described in Client to Server Interactions.
5.2 Inbox

The inbox is discovered through the inbox property of an actor's profile. The inbox MUST be an OrderedCollection.

The inbox stream contains all activities received by the actor. The server SHOULD filter content according to the requester's permission. In general, the owner of an inbox is likely to be able to access all of their inbox contents. Depending on access control, some other content may be public, whereas other content may require authentication for non-owner users, if they can access the inbox at all.

The server MUST perform de-duplication of activities returned by the inbox. Duplication can occur if an activity is addressed both to an actor's followers, and a specific actor who also follows the recipient actor, and the server has failed to de-duplicate the recipients list. Such deduplication MUST be performed by comparing the id of the activities and dropping any activities already seen.

The inboxes of actors on federated servers accepts HTTP POST requests, with behaviour described in Delivery. Non-federated servers SHOULD return a 405 Method Not Allowed upon receipt of a POST request.
5.3 Followers Collection

Every actor SHOULD have a followers collection. This is a list of everyone who has sent a Follow activity for the actor, added as a side effect. This is where one would find a list of all the actors that are following the actor. The followers collection MUST be either an OrderedCollection or a Collection and MAY be filtered on privileges of an authenticated user or as appropriate when no authentication is given.
Note: Default for notification targeting

The follow activity generally is a request to see the objects an actor creates. This makes the Followers collection an appropriate default target for delivery of notifications.
5.4 Following Collection

Every actor SHOULD have a following collection. This is a list of everybody that the actor has followed, added as a side effect. The following collection MUST be either an OrderedCollection or a Collection and MAY be filtered on privileges of an authenticated user or as appropriate when no authentication is given.
5.5 Liked Collection

Every actor MAY have a liked collection. This is a list of every object from all of the actor's Like activities, added as a side effect. The liked collection MUST be either an OrderedCollection or a Collection and MAY be filtered on privileges of an authenticated user or as appropriate when no authentication is given.
5.6 Public Addressing

In addition to [ActivityStreams] collections and objects, Activities may additionally be addressed to the special "public" collection, with the identifier https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public. For example:
Example 10

{
  "@context": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
  "id": "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public",
  "type": "Collection"
}

Activities addressed to this special URI shall be accessible to all users, without authentication. Implementations MUST NOT deliver to the "public" special collection; it is not capable of receiving actual activities. However, actors MAY have a sharedInbox endpoint which is available for efficient shared delivery of public posts (as well as posts to followers-only); see 7.1.3 Shared Inbox Delivery.
Note

Compacting an ActivityStreams object using the ActivityStreams JSON-LD context might result in https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams#Public being represented as simply Public or as:Public which are valid representations of the Public collection. Implementations which treat ActivityStreams objects as simply JSON rather than converting an incoming activity over to a local context using JSON-LD tooling should be aware of this and should be prepared to accept all three representations.
5.7 Likes Collection

Every object MAY have a likes collection. This is a list of all Like activities with this object as the object property, added as a side effect. The likes collection MUST be either an OrderedCollection or a Collection and MAY be filtered on privileges of an authenticated user or as appropriate when no authentication is given.
Note

Care should be taken to not confuse the the likes collection with the similarly named but different liked collection. In sum:

    liked: Specifically a property of actors. This is a collection of Like activities performed by the actor, added to the collection as a side effect of delivery to the outbox.
    likes: May be a property of any object. This is a collection of Like activities referencing this object, added to the collection as a side effect of delivery to the inbox.

5.8 Shares Collection

Every object MAY have a shares collection. This is a list of all Announce activities with this object as the object property, added as a side effect. The shares collection MUST be either an OrderedCollection or a Collection and MAY be filtered on privileges of an authenticated user or as appropriate when no authentication is given.

7. Server to Server Interactions

Servers communicate with other servers and propagate information across the social graph by posting activities to actors' inbox endpoints. An Activity sent over the network SHOULD have an id, unless it is intended to be transient (in which case it MAY omit the id).

POST requests (eg. to the inbox) MUST be made with a Content-Type of application/ld+json; profile="https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams" and GET requests (see also 3.2 Retrieving objects) with an Accept header of application/ld+json; profile="https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams". Servers SHOULD interpret a Content-Type or Accept header of application/activity+json as equivalent to application/ld+json; profile="https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams" for server-to-server interactions.

In order to propagate updates throughout the social graph, Activities are sent to the appropriate recipients. First, these recipients are determined through following the appropriate links between objects until you reach an actor, and then the Activity is inserted into the actor's inbox (delivery). This allows recipient servers to:

    conduct any side effects related to the Activity (for example, notification that an actor has liked an object is used to update the object's like count);
    deliver the Activity to recipients of the original object, to ensure updates are propagated to the whole social graph (see inbox delivery).

Delivery is usually triggered by, for example:

    an Activity being created in an actor's outbox with their Followers Collection as the recipient.
    an Activity being created in an actor's outbox with directly addressed recipients.
    an Activity being created in an actors's outbox with user-curated collections as recipients.
    an Activity being created in an actor's outbox or inbox which references another object.

Servers performing delivery to the inbox or sharedInbox properties of actors on other servers MUST provide the object property in the activity: Create, Update, Delete, Follow, Add, Remove, Like, Block, Undo. Additionally, servers performing server to server delivery of the following activities MUST also provide the target property: Add, Remove.

HTTP caching mechanisms [RFC7234] SHOULD be respected when appropriate, both when receiving responses from other servers as well as sending responses to other servers.
7.1 Delivery

The following is required by federated servers communicating with other federated servers only.

An activity is delivered to its targets (which are actors) by first looking up the targets' inboxes and then posting the activity to those inboxes. Targets for delivery are determined by checking the ActivityStreams audience targeting; namely, the to, bto, cc, bcc, and audience fields of the activity.

The inbox is determined by first retrieving the target actor's JSON-LD representation and then looking up the inbox property. If a recipient is a Collection or OrderedCollection, then the server MUST dereference the collection (with the user's credentials) and discover inboxes for each item in the collection. Servers MUST limit the number of layers of indirections through collections which will be performed, which MAY be one.

Servers MUST de-duplicate the final recipient list. Servers MUST also exclude actors from the list which are the same as the actor of the Activity being notified about. That is, actors shouldn't have their own activities delivered to themselves.
Note: Silent and private activities

What to do when there are no recipients specified is not defined, however it's recommended that if no recipients are specified the object remains completely private and access controls restrict the access to object. If the object is just sent to the "public" collection the object is not delivered to any actors but is publicly viewable in the actor's outbox.

An HTTP POST request (with authorization of the submitting user) is then made to the inbox, with the Activity as the body of the request. This Activity is added by the receiver as an item in the inbox OrderedCollection. Attempts to deliver to an inbox on a non-federated server SHOULD result in a 405 Method Not Allowed response.

For federated servers performing delivery to a third party server, delivery SHOULD be performed asynchronously, and SHOULD additionally retry delivery to recipients if it fails due to network error.

Note: Activities being distributed between actors on the same origin may use any internal mechanism, and are not required to use HTTP.
Note: Relationship to Linked Data Notifications

While it is not required reading to understand this specification, it is worth noting that ActivityPub's targeting and delivery mechanism overlaps with the Linked Data Notifications specification, and the two specifications may interoperably combined. In particular, the inbox property is the same between ActivityPub and Linked Data Notifications, and the targeting and delivery systems described in this document are supported by Linked Data Notifications. In addition to JSON-LD compacted ActivityStreams documents, Linked Data Notifications also supports a number of RDF serializations which are not required for ActivityPub implementations. However, ActivityPub implementations which wish to be more broadly compatible with Linked Data Notifications implementations may wish to support other RDF representations.
7.1.1 Outbox Delivery Requirements for Server to Server

When objects are received in the outbox (for servers which support both Client to Server interactions and Server to Server Interactions), the server MUST target and deliver to:

    The to, bto, cc, bcc or audience fields if their values are individuals or Collections owned by the actor.

These fields will have been populated appropriately by the client which posted the Activity to the outbox.
7.1.2 Forwarding from Inbox
Note: Forwarding to avoid the ghost replies problem

The following section is to mitigate the "ghost replies" problem which occasionally causes problems on federated networks. This problem is best demonstrated with an example.

Alyssa makes a post about her having successfully presented a paper at a conference and sends it to her followers collection, which includes her friend Ben. Ben replies to Alyssa's message congratulating her and includes her followers collection on the recipients. However, Ben has no access to see the members of Alyssa's followers collection, so his server does not forward his messages to their inbox. Without the following mechanism, if Alyssa were then to reply to Ben, her followers would see Alyssa replying to Ben without having ever seen Ben interacting. This would be very confusing!

When Activities are received in the inbox, the server needs to forward these to recipients that the origin was unable to deliver them to. To do this, the server MUST target and deliver to the values of to, cc, and/or audience if and only if all of the following are true:

    This is the first time the server has seen this Activity.
    The values of to, cc, and/or audience contain a Collection owned by the server.
    The values of inReplyTo, object, target and/or tag are objects owned by the server. The server SHOULD recurse through these values to look for linked objects owned by the server, and SHOULD set a maximum limit for recursion (ie. the point at which the thread is so deep the recipients followers may not mind if they are no longer getting updates that don't directly involve the recipient). The server MUST only target the values of to, cc, and/or audience on the original object being forwarded, and not pick up any new addressees whilst recursing through the linked objects (in case these addressees were purposefully amended by or via the client).

The server MAY filter its delivery targets according to implementation-specific rules (for example, spam filtering).
7.1.3 Shared Inbox Delivery

For servers hosting many actors, delivery to all followers can result in an overwhelming number of messages sent. Some servers would also like to display a list of all messages posted publicly to the "known network". Thus ActivityPub provides an optional mechanism for serving these two use cases.

When an object is being delivered to the originating actor's followers, a server MAY reduce the number of receiving actors delivered to by identifying all followers which share the same sharedInbox who would otherwise be individual recipients and instead deliver objects to said sharedInbox. Thus in this scenario, the remote/receiving server participates in determining targeting and performing delivery to specific inboxes.

Additionally, if an object is addressed to the Public special collection, a server MAY deliver that object to all known sharedInbox endpoints on the network.

Origin servers sending publicly addressed activities to sharedInbox endpoints MUST still deliver to actors and collections otherwise addressed (through to, bto, cc, bcc, and audience) which do not have a sharedInbox and would not otherwise receive the activity through the sharedInbox mechanism.
7.2 Create Activity

Receiving a Create activity in an inbox has surprisingly few side effects; the activity should appear in the actor's inbox and it is likely that the server will want to locally store a representation of this activity and its accompanying object. However, this mostly happens in general with processing activities delivered to an inbox anyway.
7.3 Update Activity

For server to server interactions, an Update activity means that the receiving server SHOULD update its copy of the object of the same id to the copy supplied in the Update activity. Unlike the client to server handling of the Update activity, this is not a partial update but a complete replacement of the object.

The receiving server MUST take care to be sure that the Update is authorized to modify its object. At minimum, this may be done by ensuring that the Update and its object are of same origin.
7.4 Delete Activity

The side effect of receiving this is that (assuming the object is owned by the sending actor / server) the server receiving the delete activity SHOULD remove its representation of the object with the same id, and MAY replace that representation with a Tombstone object.

(Note that after an activity has been transmitted from an origin server to a remote server, there is nothing in the ActivityPub protocol that can enforce remote deletion of an object's representation).
7.5 Follow Activity

The side effect of receiving this in an inbox is that the server SHOULD generate either an Accept or Reject activity with the Follow as the object and deliver it to the actor of the Follow. The Accept or Reject MAY be generated automatically, or MAY be the result of user input (possibly after some delay in which the user reviews). Servers MAY choose to not explicitly send a Reject in response to a Follow, though implementors ought to be aware that the server sending the request could be left in an intermediate state. For example, a server might not send a Reject to protect a user's privacy.

In the case of receiving an Accept referencing this Follow as the object, the server SHOULD add the actor to the object actor's Followers Collection. In the case of a Reject, the server MUST NOT add the actor to the object actor's Followers Collection.
Note

Sometimes a successful Follow subscription may occur but at some future point delivery to the follower fails for an extended period of time. Implementations should be aware that there is no guarantee that actors on the network will remain reachable and should implement accordingly. For instance, if attempting to deliver to an actor for perhaps six months while the follower remains unreachable, it is reasonable that the delivering server remove the subscriber from the followers list. Timeframes and behavior for dealing with unreachable actors are left to the discretion of the delivering server.
7.6 Accept Activity

The side effect of receiving this in an inbox is determined by the type of the object received, and it is possible to accept types not described in this document (for example, an Offer).

If the object of an Accept received to an inbox is a Follow activity previously sent by the receiver, the server SHOULD add the actor to the receiver's Following Collection.
7.7 Reject Activity

The side effect of receiving this in an inbox is determined by the type of the object received, and it is possible to reject types not described in this document (for example, an Offer).

If the object of a Reject received to an inbox is a Follow activity previously sent by the receiver, this means the recipient did not approve the Follow request. The server MUST NOT add the actor to the receiver's Following Collection.
7.8 Add Activity

Upon receipt of an Add activity into the inbox, the server SHOULD add the object to the collection specified in the target property, unless:

    the target is not owned by the receiving server, and thus they can't update it.
    the object is not allowed to be added to the target collection for some other reason, at the receiver's discretion.

7.9 Remove Activity

Upon receipt of a Remove activity into the inbox, the server SHOULD remove the object from the collection specified in the target property, unless:

    the target is not owned by the receiving server, and thus they can't update it.
    the object is not allowed to be removed to the target collection for some other reason, at the receiver's discretion.

7.10 Like Activity

The side effect of receiving this in an inbox is that the server SHOULD increment the object's count of likes by adding the received activity to the likes collection if this collection is present.
7.11 Announce Activity (sharing)

Upon receipt of an Announce activity in an inbox, a server SHOULD increment the object's count of shares by adding the received activity to the shares collection if this collection is present.
Note
The Announce activity is effectively what is known as "sharing", "reposting", or "boosting" in other social networks.
7.12 Undo Activity

The Undo activity is used to undo the side effects of previous activities. See the ActivityStreams documentation on Inverse Activities and "Undo". The scope and restrictions of the Undo activity are the same as for the Undo activity in the context of client to server interactions, but applied to a federated context.
A. Internationalization

This section is non-normative.

Building an international base of users is important in a federated network. ActivityStreams provides tooling for internationalization of content, which should be used whenever possible. However, it can be difficult for implementations to determine which @language property to provide for user-submitted content. The W3C Internationalization group provides some guidance on language detection.
B. Security Considerations

This section is non-normative.
B.1 Authentication and Authorization

ActivityPub uses authentication for two purposes; first, to authenticate clients to servers, and secondly in federated implementations to authenticate servers to each other.

Unfortunately at the time of standardization, there are no strongly agreed upon mechanisms for authentication. Some possible directions for authentication are laid out in the Social Web Community Group Authentication and Authorization best practices report.
B.2 Verification

Servers should not trust client submitted content, and federated servers also should not trust content received from a server other than the content's origin without some form of verification.

Servers should be careful to verify that new content is really posted by the actor that claims to be posting it, and that the actor has permission to update the resources it claims to. See also 3. Objects and B.1 Authentication and Authorization.
B.3 Accessing localhost URIs

It is often convenient while developing to test against a process running on localhost. However, permitting requests to localhost in a production client or server instance can be dangerous. Making requests to URIs on localhost which do not require authorization may unintentionally access or modify resources assumed to be protected to be usable by localhost-only.

If your ActivityPub server or client does permit making requests to localhost URIs for development purposes, consider making it a configuration option which defaults to off.
B.4 URI Schemes

There are many types of URIs aside from just http and https. Some libraries which handle fetching requests at various URI schemes may try to be smart and reference schemes which may be undesirable, such as file. Client and server authors should carefully check how their libraries handle requests, and potentially whitelist only certain safe URI types, such as http and https.
B.5 Recursive Objects

Servers should set a limit on how deep to recurse while resolving objects, or otherwise specially handle ActivityStreams objects with recursive references. Failure to properly do so may result in denial-of-service security vulnerabilities.
B.6 Spam

Spam is a problem in any network, perhaps especially so in federated networks. While no specific mechanism for combating spam is provided in ActivityPub, it is recommended that servers filter incoming content both by local untrusted users and any remote users through some sort of spam filter.
B.7 Federation denial-of-service

Servers should implement protections against denial-of-service attacks from other, federated servers. This can be done using, for example, some kind of ratelimiting mechanism. Servers should be especially careful to implement this protection around activities that involve side effects. Servers SHOULD also take care not to overload servers with submissions, for example by using an exponential backoff strategy.
B.8 Client-to-server ratelimiting

Servers should ratelimit API client submissions. This serves two purposes:

    It prevents malicious clients from conducting denial-of-service attacks on the server.
    It ensures that the server will not distribute so many activities that it triggers another server's denial-of-service protections.

B.9 Client-to-server response denial-of-service

In order to prevent a client from being overloaded by oversized Collections, servers should take care to limit the size of Collection pages they return to clients. Clients should still be prepared to limit the size of responses they are willing to handle in case they connect to malicious or compromised servers, for example by timing out and generating an error.
B.10 Sanitizing Content

Any activity field being rendered for browsers (or other rich text enabled applications) should take care to sanitize fields containing markup to prevent cross site scripting attacks.
B.11 Not displaying bto and bcc properties

bto and bcc already must be removed for delivery, but servers are free to decide how to represent the object in their own storage systems. However, since bto and bcc are only intended to be known/seen by the original author of the object/activity, servers should omit these properties during display as well.
